migrations/README.md, before:

# Configuration Migration System

A version control system for configuration files that allows safe, automated schema upgrades.

## Quick Start

### First Time Setup

```bash
# Copy schema files to create your configs (inherits current migration state)
python -m migrations init
```

### Creating a Migration

Migrations are generated with the `generate` command and must be a valid Python identifier.

```bash
# Generate a new migration file
python -m migrations generate example_migration

# Edit the generated file
# migrations/migrate/{timestamp}_example_migration.py
```

### Running Migrations

```bash
# Apply all pending migrations
python -m migrations up

# Rollback the last migration
python -m migrations down

# Rollback the last 5 migrations
python -m migrations down --step 5
```

## Writing Migrations

Every migration needs to define at minimum `up(txn)` to apply changes. `down(txn)` is optional and reverts an `up()` migration. If `down()` is not defined, the migration is irreversible and raise an exception if rollback is attempted.

Both methods receive a `Transaction` object (`txn`) which ensures atomicity across all operations.

### Basic Examples

```python
from migrations import *

class example_migration(ConfigMigration):
    def up(self, txn):
        '''Add example key to all configs'''
        add_key(txn, "config.json", "example", 1)

    def down(self, txn):
        '''Remove example key'''
        remove_key(txn, "config.json", "example")
```

### Helper Functions Reference

The migration system provides helper functions that automatically handle subconfigs and ensure atomicity.

**IMPORTANT:** These helpers always operate on ALL subconfigs in a family. This is by design - migration authors cannot predict what custom subconfigs end users have created (e.g., `config.test.json`, `config.dev.json`). The helpers ensure all configurations stay in sync.

#### `add_key(txn, file_path, key, value, create_parents=True, expand_schema=True)`
Adds a key at the specified keypath. Raises `KeyError` if the key already exists or parent keys are missing and `create_parents` is False.

If `expand_schema=True` (default), operations on schema files affect all subconfigs in the family.

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # Add a top-level key to all subconfigs
    add_key(txn, "config.json", "new_field", "default_value")

    # Add a nested key (creates parent keys automatically)
    add_key(txn, "config.json", "section.subsection.field", 42)

    # Require parent keys to exist
    add_key(txn, "config.json", "existing.path.new_key", True, create_parents=False)

    # Add key via schema reference (affects all subconfigs by default)
    add_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "new_field", "value")

    # Add key only to schema file
    add_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "new_field", "value", expand_schema=False)
```

#### `overwrite_key(txn, file_path, key, value, create_parents=True, expand_schema=True)`
Adds or overwrites a key at the specified keypath. Unlike `add_key`, this will not fail if the key already exists.

If `expand_schema=True` (default), operations on schema files affect all subconfigs in the family.

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # Update existing value or create if missing (affects all subconfigs)
    overwrite_key(txn, "config.json", "version", "2.0")

    # Update via schema reference (affects all subconfigs by default)
    overwrite_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "version", "2.0")
```

#### `remove_key(txn, file_path, key, expand_schema=True)`
Removes a key at the specified keypath. If any part is not present, the key is considered already deleted (no error raised).

If `expand_schema=True` (default), operations on schema files affect all subconfigs in the family.

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # Remove a nested key from all subconfigs
    remove_key(txn, "config.json", "deprecated.old_field")

    # Remove via schema reference (affects all subconfigs by default)
    remove_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "deprecated.old_field")
```

#### `move_key(txn, file_path, src, dst, expand_schema=True)`
Moves an object at a specified key to a new key. All intermediate keys must be present. Fails if the destination already exists.

If `expand_schema=True` (default), operations on schema files affect all subconfigs in the family.

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # Move a key to a new location (must be nested under an existing parent)
    move_key(txn, "config.json", "old_location.field", "new_location")

    # Move via schema reference (affects all subconfigs by default)
    move_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "old_location.field", "new_location")
```

#### `configs(file_path, expand_schema=True)`
Returns a list of all config paths that match the reference. For custom configs, returns all matching subconfigs.

When `expand_schema=True` (default), schema paths return all subconfigs of the corresponding custom config family. When `expand_schema=False`, schema paths return only the schema file itself.

```python
from migrations.helpers import configs

def up(self, txn):
    # Get all subconfigs of config.json (e.g., config.json, config.test.json, etc.)
    all_configs = configs("config.json")

    # Get all subconfigs via schema reference (same result as above)
    all_configs = configs("config.schema.json")

    # Get only the schema file itself
    schema_only = configs("config.schema.json", expand_schema=False)

    # Process each config individually if needed
    for config_path in all_configs:
        with txn.load_for_update(config_path) as content:
            # Custom logic per config
            content["modified"] = True
```

### Working with Subconfigs

**All helper functions ALWAYS operate on all subconfigs in a family.** This is a critical design decision: migration authors cannot predict what custom subconfigs end users have created (e.g., `config.test.json`, `config.dev.json`, `config.production.json`). The helpers automatically discover and update all subconfigs to keep configurations in sync.

For example, if you have `config.json`, `config.custom.json`, and `config.test.json`:

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # This ALWAYS adds the key to ALL subconfigs: config.json, config.custom.json, config.test.json
    # You cannot selectively update only some subconfigs - this ensures consistency
    add_key(txn, "config.json", "new_field", "value")
```

#### Schema Operations

By default, operations on schema files also affect all subconfigs in the family:

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # This affects ALL custom configs: config.json, config.custom.json, config.test.json, etc.
    # The schema file itself is NOT modified (schemas are version-controlled separately)
    add_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "new_field", "value")
```

The `expand_schema` parameter only controls whether schema file references expand to custom configs. It does NOT allow selective updating of subconfigs:

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # expand_schema=False means "only modify the schema file itself"
    # This is rarely needed - typically only for schema metadata that shouldn't propagate to configs
    add_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "new_field", "value", expand_schema=False)

    # This STILL affects all subconfigs - expand_schema only applies to schema file references
    add_key(txn, "config.json", "new_field", "value", expand_schema=False)
```

All helper functions (`add_key`, `overwrite_key`, `remove_key`, `move_key`) support the `expand_schema` parameter, but it only affects schema file behavior, not subconfig expansion.

### Direct Content Manipulation

For complex transformations, load and modify content directly:

```python
def up(self, txn):
    with txn.load_for_update("config.json") as content:
        # Read existing values
        old_value = content["path"]["to"]["key"]

        # Modify in-place
        content["path"]["to"]["key"] = old_value.replace("_", "-")

        # Add computed values
        content["computed"] = len(old_value)
```

### Migration Template

When you run `python -m migrations generate <name>`, a new migration file is created with this template:

```python
from migrations import *


class <name>(ConfigMigration):
    def up(self, txn):
        raise NotImplementedError("Migration logic not implemented.")

    def down(self, txn):
        # Implement the logic to revert the migration if necessary.
        # Raises IrreversibleMigration by default.
        raise IrreversibleMigration
```

Replace the `raise NotImplementedError` with your migration logic. If the migration cannot be reversed, leave `down()` as-is with `raise IrreversibleMigration`.

## Atomicity Guarantees

If using the helpers shown above, the migration system makes strong guarantees about atomicity -- ALL operations in a migration are guaranteed to complete else ALL operations fail.

Under the hood, the migration system uses a transaction manager that compiles all changes made by a migration. The changes are written to a temporary file with a `.txn` extension. Once all changes are complete, the transaction manager copies the transaction file to the reference path, overwriting the old configuration.

---------------
> [!WARNING]  
> **Deviate from these patterns at your own risk!**
>
> Failure to follow the correct patterns can leave the migrator in invalid states.
---------------


## Tracking Migration State

The system maintains two snapshot files that record which migrations have been applied to which files:

* `migrations/migrate/schema-status.json`
  - Tracks migrations applied to schema files (`*.schema.json`). This file is committed to keep schemas in sync.
* `migrations/migrate/custom-status.json`
  - Tracks migrations applied to your custom config files. This file is ignored by git since they are custom files.

### Structure

Status files are intended to be human-readable. Each key is a path to a config file, and the values are arrays with each element being the version (timestamp) of a migration.

```json
{
  "config.schema.json": [1763750914, 1763750983],
  "coordinates/w32h32.schema.json": [1763750914]
}
```

File paths are relative to project root with forward slashes for cross-platform compatibility. They are updated with the same atomicity guarantees (modify-then-swap) as any other JSON file.

### Initializing

Running `init` performs two operations:

1. If a schema file exists but no corresponding custom file is present, the migrator copies the schema to the expected custom file path.
   * For instance, `config.schema.json` is copied to `config.json`
2. For each copied file, a record is added to the custom state, inheriting the same migration versions as the schema.

This setup allows for pre-existing custom configurations to be migrated to new versions, while allowing new installations to create up-to-date custom configurations without needing to be migrated separately.

## Working with Subconfigs

Subconfigs allow you to create multiple variations of a configuration that share the same schema. For example, you might have:

* `config.json` - Your main configuration
* `config.custom.json` - An alternate configuration for specific use cases
* `config.schema.json` - The schema definition

### Creating Subconfigs

```bash
# Create a subconfig (automatically infers reference from name)
python -m migrations subconfig config.custom.json

# Explicitly specify the reference config
python -m migrations subconfig config.custom.json --reference config.json
```

### Naming Convention

Subconfigs must follow the pattern `<name>.<subname>.json` where:
* `<name>` matches the base config name (e.g., `config`)
* `<subname>` is your custom identifier (e.g., `custom`, `dev`, `test`)
* The reference config `<name>.json` must exist
* The schema `<name>.schema.json` must exist

### Migration Behavior

Subconfigs are created by copying the reference config and inherit its complete migration state. This ensures:

* New subconfigs start at the same migration version as the reference
* All future migrations automatically apply to both the reference and subconfigs
* The migration system treats them as a family of related configurations

If a subconfig already exists with a different migration state, the `subconfig` command will abort to prevent data loss.

## Commands Reference

```bash
# Initialize configs from schemas
# This operation is idempotent
# (alias: i)
python -m migrations init

# Create a subconfiguration from a reference config
# Subconfigs inherit migration state from the reference
# (alias: s)
python -m migrations subconfig <name>.<subname>.json
python -m migrations subconfig <name>.<subname>.json --reference <name>.json

# Create new migration
# (alias: g)
python -m migrations generate <name>

# Apply migrations
# (alias: u)
python -m migrations up              # Apply all pending
python -m migrations up --step 2     # Apply next 2 only

# Rollback migrations
# (alias: d)
python -m migrations down            # Rollback last 1
python -m migrations down --step 3   # Rollback last 3
```

## Example Workflows

### Basic Migration Workflow

```bash
# 1. First time setup
python -m migrations init

# 2. Create a new migration
python -m migrations g example_migration

# 3. Edit migrations/migrate/{timestamp}_example_migration.py
# ... implement up() / down() ...

# 4. Test it
python -m migrations up      # Apply
python -m migrations down    # Rollback
python -m migrations up      # Re-apply

# 5. Commit schema & status changes
git add migrations/migrate/schema-status.json *.schema.json
git commit -m "Add example_migration field"
```

### Working with Subconfigs

```bash
# 1. Initialize main configs
python -m migrations init

# 2. Create a subconfig for testing
python -m migrations s config.test.json

# 3. Make changes to config.test.json as needed
# (edit the file manually)

# 4. Later, create a migration affecting all configs
python -m migrations g add_new_feature

# 5. In the migration, operations on "config.json" affect all subconfigs
# migrations/migrate/{timestamp}_add_new_feature.py:
#   def up(self, txn):
#       add_key(txn, "config.json", "new_feature", True)

# 6. Apply - this updates config.json AND config.test.json
python -m migrations up
```

Commit message:

Move to directory txn structure, fix readme, fix schema handling in helper

migrations/README.md, after:

# Configuration Migration System

A version control system for configuration files that allows safe, automated schema upgrades.

## Quick Start

### First Time Setup

```bash
# Copy schema files to create your configs (inherits current migration state)
python -m migrations init
```

### Creating a Migration

Migrations are generated with the `generate` command and must be a valid Python identifier.

```bash
# Generate a new migration file
python -m migrations generate example_migration

# Edit the generated file
# migrations/migrate/{timestamp}_example_migration.py
```

### Running Migrations

```bash
# Apply all pending migrations
python -m migrations up

# Rollback the last migration
python -m migrations down

# Rollback the last 5 migrations
python -m migrations down --step 5
```

## Writing Migrations

Every migration needs to define at minimum `up(txn)` to apply changes. `down(txn)` is optional and reverts an `up()` migration. If `down()` is not defined, the migration is irreversible and raise an exception if rollback is attempted.

Both methods receive a `Transaction` object (`txn`) which ensures atomicity across all operations.

### Basic Examples

```python
from migrations import *

class example_migration(ConfigMigration):
    def up(self, txn):
        '''Add example key to all configs'''
        add_key(txn, "config.json", "example", 1)

    def down(self, txn):
        '''Remove example key'''
        remove_key(txn, "config.json", "example")
```

### Helper Functions Reference

The migration system provides helper functions that automatically handle subconfigs and ensure atomicity.

**IMPORTANT:** These helpers always operate on ALL subconfigs in a family. This is by design - migration authors cannot predict what custom subconfigs end users have created (e.g., `config.test.json`, `config.dev.json`). The helpers ensure all configurations stay in sync.

#### `add_key(txn, file_path, key, value, create_parents=True, expand_schema=True)`
Adds a key at the specified keypath. Raises `KeyError` if the key already exists or parent keys are missing and `create_parents` is False.

If `expand_schema=True` (default), operations on schema files affect all subconfigs in the family.

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # Add a top-level key to all subconfigs
    add_key(txn, "config.json", "new_field", "default_value")

    # Add a nested key (creates parent keys automatically)
    add_key(txn, "config.json", "section.subsection.field", 42)

    # Require parent keys to exist
    add_key(txn, "config.json", "existing.path.new_key", True, create_parents=False)

    # Add key via schema reference (affects all subconfigs by default)
    add_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "new_field", "value")

    # Add key only to schema file
    add_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "new_field", "value", expand_schema=False)
```

#### `overwrite_key(txn, file_path, key, value, create_parents=True, expand_schema=True)`
Adds or overwrites a key at the specified keypath. Unlike `add_key`, this will not fail if the key already exists.

If `expand_schema=True` (default), operations on schema files affect all subconfigs in the family.

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # Update existing value or create if missing (affects all subconfigs)
    overwrite_key(txn, "config.json", "version", "2.0")

    # Update via schema reference (affects all subconfigs by default)
    overwrite_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "version", "2.0")
```

#### `remove_key(txn, file_path, key, expand_schema=True)`
Removes a key at the specified keypath. If any part is not present, the key is considered already deleted (no error raised).

If `expand_schema=True` (default), operations on schema files affect all subconfigs in the family.

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # Remove a nested key from all subconfigs
    remove_key(txn, "config.json", "deprecated.old_field")

    # Remove via schema reference (affects all subconfigs by default)
    remove_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "deprecated.old_field")
```

#### `move_key(txn, file_path, src, dst, expand_schema=True)`
Moves an object at a specified key to a new key. All intermediate keys must be present. Fails if the destination already exists.

If `expand_schema=True` (default), operations on schema files affect all subconfigs in the family.

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # Move a key to a new location (must be nested under an existing parent)
    move_key(txn, "config.json", "old_location.field", "new_location")

    # Move via schema reference (affects all subconfigs by default)
    move_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "old_location.field", "new_location")
```

#### `configs(file_path, expand_schema=True)`
Returns a list of all config paths that match the reference. For custom configs, returns all matching subconfigs.

When `expand_schema=True` (default), schema paths return all subconfigs of the corresponding custom config family. When `expand_schema=False`, schema paths return only the schema file itself.

```python
from migrations.helpers import configs

def up(self, txn):
    # Get all subconfigs of config.json (e.g., config.json, config.test.json, etc.)
    all_configs = configs("config.json")

    # Get all subconfigs via schema reference (same result as above)
    all_configs = configs("config.schema.json")

    # Get only the schema file itself
    schema_only = configs("config.schema.json", expand_schema=False)

    # Process each config individually if needed
    for config_path in all_configs:
        with txn.load_for_update(config_path) as content:
            # Custom logic per config
            content["modified"] = True
```

### Working with Subconfigs

**All helper functions ALWAYS operate on all subconfigs in a family.** This is a critical design decision: migration authors cannot predict what custom subconfigs end users have created (e.g., `config.test.json`, `config.dev.json`, `config.production.json`). The helpers automatically discover and update all subconfigs to keep configurations in sync.

For example, if you have `config.json`, `config.custom.json`, and `config.test.json`:

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # This ALWAYS adds the key to ALL subconfigs: config.json, config.custom.json, config.test.json
    # You cannot selectively update only some subconfigs - this ensures consistency
    add_key(txn, "config.json", "new_field", "value")
```

#### Schema Operations

By default, operations on schema files also affect all subconfigs in the family:

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # This affects ALL custom configs: config.json, config.custom.json, config.test.json, etc.
    # The schema file itself is NOT modified (schemas are version-controlled separately)
    add_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "new_field", "value")
```

The `expand_schema` parameter only controls whether schema file references expand to custom configs. It does NOT allow selective updating of subconfigs:

```python
def up(self, txn):
    # expand_schema=False means "only modify the schema file itself"
    # This is rarely needed - typically only for schema metadata that shouldn't propagate to configs
    add_key(txn, "config.schema.json", "new_field", "value", expand_schema=False)

    # This STILL affects all subconfigs - expand_schema only applies to schema file references
    add_key(txn, "config.json", "new_field", "value", expand_schema=False)
```

All helper functions (`add_key`, `overwrite_key`, `remove_key`, `move_key`) support the `expand_schema` parameter, but it only affects schema file behavior, not subconfig expansion.

### Direct Content Manipulation

For complex transformations, load and modify content directly. The context loads data from JSON as a dictionary:

```python
def up(self, txn):
    with txn.load_for_update("config.json") as content:
        # Read existing values
        old_value = content["path"]["to"]["key"]

        # Modify in-place
        content["path"]["to"]["key"] = old_value.replace("_", "-")

        # Add computed values
        content["computed"] = len(old_value)
```

### Migration Template

When you run `python -m migrations generate <name>`, a new migration file is created with this template:

```python
from migrations import *


class <name>(ConfigMigration):
    def up(self, txn):
        raise NotImplementedError("Migration logic not implemented.")

    def down(self, txn):
        # Implement the logic to revert the migration if necessary.
        # Raises IrreversibleMigration by default.
        raise IrreversibleMigration
```

Replace the `raise NotImplementedError` with your migration logic. If the migration cannot be reversed, leave `down()` as-is with `raise IrreversibleMigration`.

## Atomicity Guarantees

If using the helpers shown above, the migration system makes strong guarantees about atomicity -- ALL operations in a migration are guaranteed to complete else ALL operations fail.

Under the hood, the migration system uses a transaction manager that compiles all changes made by a migration. The changes are written to a temporary directory `migrations/migrate/.transaction`. Once all changes are complete, the transaction manager copies the transaction file to the reference path, overwriting the old configuration. Note that nested transactions are not supported.

---------------
> [!WARNING]  
> **Deviate from these patterns at your own risk!**
>
> Failure to follow the correct patterns can leave the migrator in invalid states.
---------------

## Tracking Migration State

The system maintains two snapshot files that record which migrations have been applied to which files:

* `migrations/migrate/schema-status.json`
  - Tracks migrations applied to schema files (`*.schema.json`). This file is committed to keep schemas in sync.
* `migrations/migrate/custom-status.json`
  - Tracks migrations applied to your custom config files. This file is ignored by git since they are custom files.

### Structure

Status files are intended to be human-readable. Each key is a path to a config file, and the values are arrays with each element being the version (timestamp) of a migration.

```json
{
  "config.schema.json": [1763750914, 1763750983],
  "coordinates/w32h32.schema.json": [1763750914]
}
```

File paths are relative to project root with forward slashes for cross-platform compatibility. They are updated with the same atomicity guarantees (modify-then-swap) as any other JSON file.

### Initializing

Running `init` performs two operations:

1. If a schema file exists but no corresponding custom file is present, the migrator copies the schema to the expected custom file path.
   * For instance, `config.schema.json` is copied to `config.json`
2. For each copied file, a record is added to the custom state, inheriting the same migration versions as the schema.

This setup allows for pre-existing custom configurations to be migrated to new versions, while allowing new installations to create up-to-date custom configurations without needing to be migrated separately.

## Working with Subconfigs

Subconfigs allow you to create multiple variations of a configuration that share the same schema. For example, you might have:

* `config.json` - Your main configuration
* `config.custom.json` - An alternate configuration for specific use cases
* `config.schema.json` - The schema definition

### Creating Subconfigs

```bash
# Create a subconfig (automatically infers reference from name)
python -m migrations subconfig config.custom.json

# Explicitly specify the reference config
python -m migrations subconfig config.custom.json --reference config.json
```

### Naming Convention

Subconfigs must follow the pattern `<name>.<subname>.json` where:
* `<name>` matches the base config name (e.g., `config`)
* `<subname>` is your custom identifier (e.g., `custom`, `dev`, `test`)
* The reference config `<name>.json` must exist
* The schema `<name>.schema.json` must exist

### Migration Behavior

Subconfigs are created by copying the reference config and inherit its complete migration state. This ensures:

* New subconfigs start at the same migration version as the reference
* All future migrations automatically apply to both the reference and subconfigs
* The migration system treats them as a family of related configurations

If a subconfig already exists with a different migration state, the `subconfig` command will abort to prevent data loss.

## Commands Reference

```bash
# Initialize configs from schemas
# This operation is idempotent
# (alias: i)
python -m migrations init

# Create a subconfiguration from a reference config
# Subconfigs inherit migration state from the reference
# (alias: s)
python -m migrations subconfig <name>.<subname>.json
python -m migrations subconfig <name>.<subname>.json --reference <name>.json

# Create new migration
# (alias: g)
python -m migrations generate <name>

# Apply migrations
# (alias: u)
python -m migrations up              # Apply all pending
python -m migrations up --step 2     # Apply next 2 only

# Rollback migrations
# (alias: d)
python -m migrations down            # Rollback last 1
python -m migrations down --step 3   # Rollback last 3
```

## Example Workflows

### Basic Migration Workflow

```bash
# 1. First time setup
python -m migrations init

# 2. Create a new migration
python -m migrations g example_migration

# 3. Edit migrations/migrate/{timestamp}_example_migration.py
# ... implement up() / down() ...

# 4. Test it
python -m migrations up      # Apply
python -m migrations down    # Rollback
python -m migrations up      # Re-apply

# 5. Commit schema & status changes
git add migrations/migrate/schema-status.json *.schema.json
git commit -m "Add example_migration field"
```

### Working with Subconfigs

```bash
# 1. Initialize main configs
python -m migrations init

# 2. Create a subconfig for testing
python -m migrations s config.test.json

# 3. Make changes to config.test.json as needed
# (edit the file manually)

# 4. Later, create a migration affecting all configs
python -m migrations g add_new_feature

# 5. In the migration, operations on "config.json" affect all subconfigs
# migrations/migrate/{timestamp}_add_new_feature.py:
#   def up(self, txn):
#       add_key(txn, "config.json", "new_feature", True)

# 6. Apply - this updates config.json AND config.test.json
python -m migrations up
```
